I appreciated this week's readings because the discussion of maps helped me understand the points being made more clearly. I am very enthusiastic about cartography, and I draw a lot of maps in my free time. Sometimes I draw real places, sometimes I make them up, and sometimes I'll draw the same place in different ways or with the focus on different aspects of the map.

I know what goes into the making of a map, and I know what goes into the making of an an essay or an academic article. There are analogies there, and so rooting the conversation in Baker's maps made me think of this week's work from a perspective I might have otherwise missed. I think what stood out to me most was the issue of 'soft digital history;' what remains unseen. I think if you look at the topic at face value it's easy to say 'it makes sense to excluse this information, it's just background clutter,' but when you consider your digital 'footprint' in the same way you'd consider your footnotes and bibliography things get a little more complicated.

Can you reasonably omit your footnotes? No, nor should you. Time and again in university we're told to include books in our bibliography even if we didn't directly cite them in our work. This way, you can see a paper trail left behind that shows a little glimpse into your though process and how you built your argument or narrative. When you look at the concept of 'soft digital history' in this light, it becomes a lot clearer what's at stake. I don't know how accurate my reading of this is, but it makes sense to me in this regard. Keeping a log of your process is as important to digital history as it is to conventional history.

Another aspect of the readings (and the short introductory podcast) became clear to me as I was doing my work. I wrote down in my notes that I ended up with different numbers of lines in the spreadsheet than the syllabus suggested. I had something like 175 to the syllabus' 160. This stemmed from my interpretation of the work, the instructions, and how to resolve the issues. I did not merge some of the clusters, and I deleted some of the problematic lines outright, because that was how I interpreted the instructions.

When I thought back on the readings, I realized some of the implications here. 'Digital history is MESSY.' I was following bullet-pointed instructions on a syllabus, but what did I actually just do? I deleted names and dates from an historical record, pretty much on a whim. Much like creating a map, I chose (for whatever reasons) what to include and what to exclude. Based on those decisions, the outcome of my work was undoubtedly impacted. Whether that impact was great or negligible, I changed an historical narrative.

That can happen in any number of settings for an historian. Historians make choices all the time. However, I think the digital setting did have an impact on this. What we were working on was designed to aid efficiency. I chose an efficient path, and I might not have considered the consequences before doing so. On paper fixing faulty lines involves actively fixing the problem. Digitally, my solution was one press of the backspace key away.

When you get into the nitty-gritty details of digital history as we are, you start to see the powerful tools at your disposal. Even if everything appears to be automated or efficient, there is still consideration that has to be made when carrying out these commands or running these programs. I think it even ties back to the matter of 'soft digital history' in this regard. It IS a messy process, and things can (and will) go wrong. That 'paper trail' not only shows your thought process, but it can help you to spot and rectify places you've made mistakes or taken shortcuts. Without it, you (and subsequent digital historians) would lack the means to retrace steps, build upon, and make better the production of digital history.
